i'm quincy howe of cb of abc news
saying good evening from new york where
the two major candidates for president
of the united states are about to engage
in their fourth radio television
discussion of the present campaign
tonight these men will confine that
discussion to foreign policy
good evening vice president nixon good
evening mr howe and good evening
senator kennedy
good evening mr howe now let me read
the rules and conditions under which the
candidates themselves have agreed to
proceed as they did in their first
meeting both men will make opening
statements of about eight minutes each
and closing statements of equal time
running three to five minutes each
during the half hour between the opening
and closing statements the candidates
will answer and comment upon questions
from a panel of four correspondents
chosen by the nationwide networks that
carry the program each candidate will be
questioned in turn with opportunity for
comment by the other each answer will be
limited to two and one-half minutes each
comment to one and one-half minutes the
correspondents are free to ask any
questions they choose in the field of
foreign affairs neither candidate knows
what questions will be asked time alone
will determine the final question
reversing the order in their first
meeting senator kennedy will make the
second opening statement and the first
closing statement for the first opening
statement here is vice president nixon
mr howe
senator kennedy my fellow americans
since this campaign began i have had a
very rare privilege i have traveled to
48 of the 50 states and in my travels i
have learned what the people of the
united states are thinking about there
is one issue that stands out above all
the rest one in which every american is
concerned regardless of what group he
may be a member and regardless of where
he may live and that issue very simply
stated is this how can we keep the peace
keep it without surrender
how can we extend freedom extend it
without war now in determining how we
deal with this issue we must find the
answer to a very important but simple
question who threatens the peace who
threatens freedom in the world there is
only one threat to peace and one threat
to freedom that that is presented by the
international communist movement and
therefore if we are to have peace if we
are to keep our own freedom and extend
it to others without war we must know
how to deal with the communists and
their leaders i know
mr khrushchev i also have had the
opportunity of knowing and meeting other
communist leaders in the world i believe
there are certain principles we must
find in dealing with him and his
colleagues principles if followed that
will keep the peace and that also can
extend freedom first we have to learn
from the past because we cannot afford
to make the mistakes of the past in the
seven years before this administration
came into power in washington we found
that 600 million people went behind the
iron curtain and at the end of that
seven years we were engaged in a war in
korea which cost over 30,000 american
lives in the past seven years in
president eisenhower's administration
this situation has been reversed we
ended the korean war by strong firm
leadership we have kept out of other
wars and we have avoided surrender of
principle or territory at the conference
table now why were we successful as our
predecessors were not successful i think
there's several reasons in the first
place they made a fatal error in misjudging
the communists in trying to apply to
them the same rules of conduct that you
would apply to the leaders of the free
world one of the major errors they made was
the one that led to the korean war in
ruling out the defense of korea they
invited aggression in that area they
thought they were going to have peace it
brought war we learn from their mistakes
and so in our seven years we find that
we have been firm in our diplomacy we
have never made concessions without
getting concessions in return we have
always been willing to go the extra mile
to negotiate for disarmament or in any
other area but we have never been
willing to do anything that in effect
surrendered freedom anyplace in the
world that is why president eisenhower
was correct in not apologizing or
expressing regrets to mr khrushchev at
the paris conference as senator kennedy
suggested he could have done that is why
senator president eisenhower was also
correct in his policy in the formosa
straits where he declined and refused to
follow the recommendations
recommendations which senator kennedy
voted for in 1955 again made in 1959
again repeated in his debates that you
have heard recommendations with regard
to again slicing off a piece of free
territory and abandoning it in effect to
the communists why did the president
feel this was wrong and why was the
president right and his critics wrong
because again this showed a lack of
understanding of dictators a lack of
understanding particularly of communists
because every time you make such a
concession it does not lead to peace it
only encourages them to blackmail you it
encourages them to begin a war and so i
say that the record shows that we know
how to keep the peace to keep it without
surrender let us move now to the future
it is not enough to stand on this record
because we are dealing with the most
ruthless fanatical leaders that the
world has ever seen that is why i say
that in this period of the 60s america
must move forward in every area
first of all although we are today as
senator kennedy has admitted the
strongest nation in the world militarily
we must increase our strength increase
it so that we will always have enough
strength that regardless of what our
potential opponents have if they should
launch a surprise attack we will be able
to destroy their warmaking capability
they must know in other words that it is
national suicide if they begin anything
we need this kind of strength because
we're the guardians of the peace in
addition to military strength we need to
see that the economy of this country
continues to grow it has grown in the
past seven years it can and will grow
even more in the next four and the
reason that it must grow even more is
because we have things to do at home and
also because we are in a race for
survival a race in which it isn't enough
to be ahead it isn't enough simply to be
complacent we have to move ahead in
order to stay ahead and that is why in
this field i have made recommendations
which i am confident will move the
american economy ahead move it firmly
and soundly so that there will never be
a time when the soviet union will be
able to challenge our superiority in
this field and so we need military
strength we need economic strength we
also need the right diplomatic policies
what are they again we turn to the past
firmness but no belligerence and by no
belligerence i mean that we do not
answer insult by insult when you are
proud and confident of your strength you
do not get down to the level of mr
khrushchev and his colleagues and that
example that president eisenhower has
set we will continue to follow but all
this by itself is not enough it is not
enough for us simply to be the strongest
nation militarily the strongest
economically and also to have firm
diplomacy we must have a great goal and
that is not just to keep freedom for
ourselves but to extend it to all the
world to extend it to all the world because
that is america's destiny to extend it
to all the world because the communist
aim is not to hold their own but to
extend communism and you cannot fight a
victory for communism or a strategy of
victory for communism with a strategy
simply of holding the line and so i say
that we believe that our policies of
military strength of economic strength of
diplomatic firmness first will keep the
peace and keep it without surrender we
also believe that in the great field of
ideals that we can lead america to the
victory for freedom victory in the newly
developing countries victory also in the
captive countries provided we have faith
in ourselves and faith in our principles
now the opening statement of senator
kennedy mr howe mr vice president first uh let me
again try to correct the record on the
matter of quemoy and matsu i voted for
the formosa resolution in 1955 i have
sustained it since then i've said that i
agree with the administration policy mr
nixon earlier indicated that he would
defend quemoy and matsu even if the
attack on these islands two miles off
the coast of china were not part of a
general attack on formosa and the
pescadores i indicated that i would
defend those island if the attack were
directed against pescadores and
formosa which is part of the
eisenhower policy i've supported that
policy in the last week as a member of
the senate foreign relations committee i
reread the testimony of general twining
representing the administration in 1959
and the assistant secretary of state
before the foreign relations committee
in 1958 and i have accurately described
the administration policy and i support
it wholeheartedly
so that really isn't an issue in this
campaign it isn't an issue with mr
nixon who now says that he also supports
the eisenhower policy nor is the
question that all americans want peace
and security an issue in this campaign
the question is are we moving in the
direction of peace and security is our
relative strength growing is as mr
nixon says our prestige
at an all time high as he said a week ago and
that of the communists at an all-time
low i don't believe it is i don't
believe that our relative strength is
increasing and i say that not as the
democratic standard-bearer but as a
citizen of the united states who is
concerned about the united states
i look at cuba 90 miles off the coast of
the united states in 1957 i was in
havana i talked to the american
ambassador there he said that he was the
second most powerful man in cuba and yet
even though ambassador smith and
ambassador gardner both republican
ambassadors both warned of castro the
marxist influences around castro the
communist influences around castro both
of them have testified in the last six
weeks that in spite of their warnings to
the american government nothing was done
our d security depends upon latin
america can any american looking at the
situation in latin america feel
contented with what's happening today
when a candidate for the presidency of
brazil feels it necessary to call not on
washington during the campaign but on
castro in havana in order to pick up the
support of the castro supporters in
brazil at the american conference
inter-american conference this summer
when we wanted them to join together in
the denunciation of castro and the cuban
communists we couldn't even get the
inter-american group to join together in
denouncing castro it was rather a vague
statement that they finally made do you
know today that the com the russians
broadcast 10 times as many programs in
spanish to latin america as we do do you
know we don't have a single program
sponsored by our government to cuba to
tell them our story to tell them that we
are their friends that we want them to
be free again africa is now the emerging
area of the world
it contains 25 percent of all the members of
the general assembly we didn't even have
a bureau of african affairs until 1957
in the africa south of the sahara which
is the major new section we have less
students from all of africa in that area
studying under government auspices today
than from the country of thailand if
there's one thing africa needs it's
technical assistance and yet last year
we gave them less than five percent of all the
technical assistance funds that we
distributed around the world
we relied in the middle
east on the baghdad pact and yet when the
iraqi government was changed the baghdad
pact broke down we relied on the
eisenhower doctrine for the middle east
which passed the senate
there isn't one country in the middle
east that now endorses the eisenhower
doctrine we look to europe uh to
asia because the struggle is in the
underdeveloped world which system
communism or freedom will triumph in the
next five or ten years that's what should
concern us not the history of 10 or
15 or 20 years ago but are we
doing enough in these areas what are
freedom's chances in those areas by 1965
or 1970 will there be other cubas in
latin america will guinea and ghana
which have now voted with the communists
frequently as newly independent
countries of africa will there be others
will the congo go communist will other
countries are we doing enough in that
area and what about asia is india going
to win the economic struggle or is china
going to win it who will dominate asia
in the next five or ten years communism
the chinese or will freedom the question
which we have to decide as americans are
we doing enough today is our strength
and prestige rising do people want to be
identified with us do they want to
follow the united states leadership i
don't think they do enough and that's
what concerns me in africa these
countries that have newly joined the
united nations on the question of
admission of red china only two
countries in all of africa voted with us
liberia and the union of south africa
the rest either abstained or voted
against us more countries in asia voted
against us on that question than voted
with us i believe that this struggle is
going to go on and it may well be
decided in the next decade i have seen
cuba go to the communists i have seen
communist influence and castro influence
rise in latin america i have seen us
ignore africa there are six countries in
africa that are members of the united
nations there isn't a single american
diplomatic representative in any of
those six when guinea became independent
the soviet ambassador showed up that
very day we didn't recognize them for
two months the american ambassador
didn't show up for nearly eight months i
believe that the world is changing fast
and i don't think this administration
has shown the foresight has shown the
knowledge has been identified
with the great fight which these people
are waging to be free to get a better
standard of living to live better the
average income in some of those
countries is 25 dollars a year
the communists say come with us look
what we've done and we've been in on the
whole uninterested i think we're going to
have to do better mr nixon talks about
our being the strongest country in the
world i think we are today but we were far
stronger relative to the communists five
years ago and what is of great concern
is that the balance of power is in
danger of moving with them they made a
breakthrough in missiles and by 1961 two
and three they will be outnumbering us
in missiles
i'm not as confident as he is that we
will be the strongest military power by
1963 he talks about economic growth as a
great indicator of freedom i agree with
him what we do in this country the kind
of society that we build that will
tell whether freedom will be sustained
around the world
and yet in the last nine months of this
year we've had a drop in our economic
growth rather than a gain we've had the
lowest rate of increase of economic growth
in the last nine months of any major
industrialized society in the world i
look up and see the soviet flag on the
moon the fact is that the state
department polls on our prestige and
influence around the world have shown
such a sharp drop that up till now the
state department has been unwilling to
release them and yet they were polled by
the u.s.i.a the point of all this is this
is a struggle in which we're engaged we
want peace we want freedom we want
security we want to be stronger we want
freedom to gain but i don't believe in
these changing and revolutionary times
this administration has known that the
world is changing has identified itself
with that change i think the communists
have been moving with vigor laos
africa cuba all around the world they're
on the move i think we have to
revitalize our society i think we have
to demonstrate to the people of the
world that we're determined in this
free country of ours to be first not
first if not first but not first when
but first and when we are strong and
when we are first then freedom gains
then the prospects for peace increase
then the prospects for our security gain
that completes the opening statements
now the candidates will answer and
comment upon questions put by these four
correspondents frank singiser of mutual news john
edwards of abc news walter cronkite of
cbs news john chancellor at nbc news
frank singiser has the first question
for vice president nixon mr vice
president i'd like to pin down the difference
between the way you would handle
castro's regime and prevent the
establishment of communist governments
the western hemisphere
and the way that senator kennedy would
proceed uh vice president nixon in what
important respects do you feel there are
differences between you and why do you
believe your policy is better for the
peace and security of the united states
in the western hemisphere our policies
are very different i think that senator
kennedy's policies and recommendations
for the handling of the castro regime
are probably the most dangers
dangerously irresponsible
recommendations that he's made during
the course of this campaign in effect
what senator kennedy recommends is that
the united states government should give
help to the exiles and to those within
cuba who oppose the castro regime
provided they are
anti-batista now let's just see what this
means we have five treaties with latin
america including the one setting up the
organization of american states in
bogota in 1948 in which we've agreed not
to intervene in the internal affairs of
any other american country and they as
well have agreed to do likewise the
charter of the united nations its
preamble article i and article ii also
provide that there shall be no
intervention by one nation in the
internal affairs of another now i don't
know what senator kennedy suggests when
he says that we should help those who
oppose the castro regime both in cuba
and without but i do know this that if
we were to follow
that recommendation that we would lose all of
our friends in latin america we would
probably be condemned in the united
nations and we would not accomplish our
objective i know something else it would
be an open invitation for mr khrushchev
to come in to come into latin america
and to engage us in what would be a
civil war and possibly even worse than
that this is the major recommendation
that he's made now what can we do well we can
do what we did with guatemala there was
a communist dictator that we inherited
from the previous administration we
quarantined mr arbenz
the result was that the guatemalan
people themselves eventually rose up and
they threw him out we are quarantining mr
castro today we're quarantining him
diplomatically by bringing back our
ambassador economically by cutting off
trade and senator kennedy's suggestion
that the trade that we cut off is not
significant is just 100 percent wrong we are
cutting off the significant items that
the cuban regime needs in order to
survive by cutting off trade by cutting
off our diplomatic relations as we have
we will quarantine this regime so that
the people of cuba themselves will take
care of mr castro but for us to do what
senator kennedy has suggested would
bring results which i know he would not
want and certainly which the american
people would not want mr nixon uh shows himself i misinformed he surely must be aware
that most of the equipment and arms and
resources for castro came from the
united states flowed out of florida and
other parts of the united states to
castro in the mountains there isn't any
doubt about that number one number two i
believe that if any economic sanctions
against latin america are going to be
successful they have to be multilateral
they have to include the other countries
of latin america the very minute effect
of the action which has been taken this
week on cuba's economy i believe castro
can replace those markets very easily
through latin america through europe and
through eastern europe if the united
states had stronger prestige and
influence in latin america it could
persuade as franklin roosevelt did in
1940 the countries of latin america to
join in an economic quarantine of castro
that's the only way you can bring real
economic pressure
on the castro regime and also the
countries of western europe canada japan
and the others number three castro is
only the beginning of our difficulties
throughout latin america the big
struggle will be to prevent the
influence of castro spreading to other
countries mexico panama brazil bolivia
colombia we're going to have to try to
provide closer ties to associate
ourselves with the great desire of these
people for a better life if we're going
to prevent castro's influence from
spreading throughout all of latin
america his influence is strong enough
today to prevent us from joi getting the
other countries of latin america to join
with us in economic quarantine his
influence is growing mostly because this
administration has ignored latin america
you yourself said mr vice president a
month ago that if we had provided the
kind of economic aid five years ago that we
are now providing we might never have
had castro why didn't we john edwards
has his first question for senator
kennedy senator kennedy one test of a
new president's leadership will be the
caliber of his appointments it's a
matter of interest here and overseas as
to who will be the new secretary of
state under our rules i must ask this
question of you but i would hope that
the vice president also would answer it
will you give us the names of three or
four americans each of whom if appointed
would serve with distinction in your
judgment as secretary of state mr
edwards i don't think it's a wise idea
for presidential candidates to appoint
the members of his cabinet prospectively
or to suggest four people indicate that
one of them surely will be appointed
this is a decision that the president of
the united states must make the last
candidate who indicated that he who his
cabinet was going to be was mr dewey
in 1948 this is a race between the vice
president and myself for the presidency
of the united states there are a good
many able men who could be secretary of
state i have made no judgment about who
should be the secretary of state i think
that judgment could be made after
election if i'm successful the people
have to make a choice between mr nixon
and myself between the republican party
and the democratic party between our
approach to the problems which now
disturb us as a nation and disturb us as
a world power the president bears the
constitutional responsibility not the
secretary of state for the
conduct of foreign affairs some presidents
have been strong in foreign policy
others have relied heavily on the
secretary of state i have been a member
of the senate foreign relations
committee i run for the presidency with
full knowledge that his great
responsibility really given to them by
the constitution and by the force of
events is in the field of foreign
affairs i'm asking the people's support as
president we will select the best men we
can get but i've not made a judgment
and i have not narrowed down a list of
three or four people among whom would be
the candidate mr vice president do you
have a comment mr edwards as you
probably know i have consistently
answered all questions with regard to
who will be in the next cabinet by
saying that that is the responsibility
of the next president and it would be
inappropriate to make any decisions on
that or to announce any prior to the
time that i had the right to do so
so that is my answer to this question
if you don't mind i'd like to use the
balance of the time to respond to one of
the comments that senator kennedy made
on the previous question
eh he was talking about the castro regime
and what we had been eh doing in latin
america i would like to point out that
when we look at our programs in latin
america we find that we have
appropriated five times as much for
latin america as was appropriated by the
previous administration we find that we
have two billion dollars more for the
export-import bank we have a new bank
for latin america alone of a billion
dollars we have the new program which
was submitted at the bogota conference
this new program that president
eisenhower submitted approved by the
last congress for 500 million
dollars we have moved in latin america very
effectively and i'd also like to point
this out senator kennedy complains very
appropriately about our inadequate
ra radio broadcasts for latin america let
me point out again that his congress the
democratic congress has cut 80 million
dollars off of the voice of america
appropriations now he has to get a
better job out of his congress if he's
going to get us the money that we need
to conduct the foreign affairs of this
country in latin america or anyplace
else walter cronkite you have your first
question for vice president nixon thank
you quincy mr vice president
senator fulbright and now
tonight senator kennedy maintain that the
administration is suppressing a report
by the united states information agency
that shows a decline in united states
prestige overseas are you aware of such
a report and if you are aware of the
existence of such a report should not
that report because of the great
importance this issue has been given in
this campaign be released to the public
mr cronkite i naturally am aware of it
because i of course pay attention to
everything senator kennedy says as well
as senator fulbright now in this
connection i want to point out that the
facts simply aren't as stated first of
all the report to which senator kennedy
refers is one that was made many many
months ago and related particularly to
the period immediately after
sputnik second as far as this report is
concerned i would have no objection to
having it made public third i would say
this with regard to this report with
regard to gallup polls of prestige
abroad and everything else that we've
been hearing about what about american
prestige abroad america's prestige
abroad will be just as high as the
spokesmen for america
allow it to be now when we have a
presidential candidate for example
senator kennedy stating over and over
again that the united states is second
in space and the fact of the matter is
that the space score today is
28 to eight we've had 28 successful
shots they've had eight when he states
that we're second in education and i have
seen soviet education and i've seen ours
and we're not that we're second in
science because they may be ahead in one
area or another when overall we're way
ahead of the soviet union and all other
countries in science when he says as he
did in january of this years that we
have the worst slums that we have the
most crowded schools when he says that
17 million people go to bed hungry every
night when he makes statements like this
what does this do to american prestige
well it can only have the effect
certainly of reducing it let me make one
thing clear senator kennedy has a
responsibility to criticize those things
that are wrong but he has also
responsibility to be right in his
criticism every one of these items that i have
mentioned he's been wrong dead wrong
and for that reason he has contributed
to any lack of prestige finally let me
say this as far as prestige is concerned
the first place it would show up would be
in the united nations now senator
kennedy has referred to the vote on
communist china let's look at the vote
on hungary there we got more votes for
condemning hungary and looking into that
situation than we got the last year
let's look at the reaction eh reaction to
khrushchev and eisenhower at the last u.n
session did khrushchev gain because he
took his shoe off and pounded the table
and shouted and insulted not at all the
president gained america gained by
continuing the dignity the decency that
has characterized us and it's that that
keeps the prestige of america up not
running down america the way senator
kennedy has been running her down
comment senator kennedy i really don't need
uh mr nixon to tell me about what my
responsibilities are as a citizen i've
served this country for 14 years in the
congress and before that in the service
i've just as high a devotion
just as high an opinion what i
downgrade mr nixon is the leadership
the country is getting not the country now i
didn't make most of the statements that you
said i made the s i believe the soviet union
is first in outer space we have may have
made more shots but the size of their rocket
thrust and all the rest you yourself
said to khrushchev
you may be ahead of us in rocket thrust
but we're ahead of you in color
television in your famous discussion in
the kitchen
i think that color television is not as
important as rocket thrust secondly i
didn't say we had the worst slums in the
world i said we had too many slums and that
they are bad and we ought to do
something about them and we ought to
support housing legislation which this
administration has opposed i didn't say
we had the worst education in the world
what i said was that 10 years ago we
were producing twice as many scientists
and engineers as the soviet union and
today they're producing twice as many as
we are and that this affects our security
around the world and fourth i believe that
the polls and other studies and votes in
the united nations and anyone reading
the paper and any citizen of the united
states must come to the conclusion that the
united states no longer carries the same
image of a vital society on the move
with its brightest days ahead as it
carried a decade or two decades ago part
of that is because we've stood still
here at home
because we haven't met our problems in
the united states because we haven't had
a moving economy part of that as the
gallup polls show is because the soviet
union made a breakthrough in outer space
mr george allen head of your information
service has said that that made the people
of the world begin to wonder whether we
were first in science we're first in
other areas of science but in space
which is the new science we're not first
john chancellor your first question for
senator kennedy senator another question
uh in connection with our relations with
the russians there have been stories
from washington from the atomic energy
commission hinting that the russians may
have resumed the testing of nuclear
devices now if sir if this is true
should the united states resume nuclear
testing and if the russians do not start
testing can you foresee any
circumstances in 1961 in which the
united states might resume its own
series of tests yes i think the next
president of the united states should
make one last effort to secure an
agreement on the cessation of tests
number one i think we should go back to
geneva who's ever elected president mr
nixon or myself and try once again if we
fail then if we're unable to come to an
agreement and i hope we can come to an
agreement because it does not merely
involve now the united states britain
france and the soviet union as atomic powers
because of new breakthroughs in atomic
energy technology there's some
indications that by the time the next
president's term of office has come to
an end there may be 10 15 or 20
countries with an atomic capacity
perhaps that many testing bombs with all
the effect that it could have on the
atmosphere and with all the chances that
more and more countries will have an
atomic capacity with more and more
chance of war so one more effort should
be made i don't think that even if that
effort fails that it will be necessary
to carry on tests in the atmosphere
which pollute the atmosphere they can be
carried out underground they c could be
carried on in outer space but i believe
the effort should be made once more by
who's ever elected president of the
united states if we fail it's been a
great serious failure for everyone for
the human race i hope we can succeed but
then if we fail responsibility will be
clearly on the russians and then we'll
have to meet our responsibilities to the
security of the united states and there may
have to be testing underground
i think the atomic energy committee is
prepared for it there may be testing
in outer space i hope it will not be
necessary for any power to resume uh
testing in the atmosphere it's possible
to detect those kind of tests the kind of
tests which you can't detect are
underground or in in uh perhaps in outer space
so that i'm hopeful we can try once more
if we fail then we must meet our
responsibilities to ourselves but i'm most
concerned about the whole problem of the
spread of atomic weapons china may have
it by 1963 egypt war has been the
constant companion of mankind so to
have these weapons disseminated around
the world i believe means that we're
going to move through a period of hazard
in the next few years we ought to make
one last effort any comment mr vice
president yes i would say first of all
that we must have in mind the fact that
we have been negotiating to get tests
inspected and uh to get an agreement for
many many months as a matter of fact
there's been a moratorium on testing as
a result of the fact that we have been
negotiating i've reached the conclusion
that the soviet union is actually
filibustering i've reached the
conclusion too based on the reports that
have been made that they may be cheating
i don't think we can wait until the next
president is inaugurated and then
selects a new team and then all the
months of negotiating that will take
place before we reach a decision i think
that immediately after this election we
should set a timetable the next
president working with the present
president president eisenhower a
timetable to break the soviet filibuster
there should be no tests in the
atmosphere that rules out any fallout
but as far as underground tests are
concerned and particularly underground
tests for developing peaceful uses of
atomic energy we should not allow this
soviet filibuster to continue i think
it's time for them to fish or cut bait i
think that the next president
immediately after his election should
sit down with the president work out a
timetable and get a decision on this
before january of next year our second
round of questions begins with one from
mr edwards for the vice president mr
nixon carrying forward this business about a
timetable as you know the pressures are
increasing for a summit conference now both
you and senator kennedy have
said that there are certain conditions
which must be met before you would meet
with khrushchev will you be more
specific about these conditions well the
conditions i laid out in one of our
previous television debates and it's
rather difficult to be much more
specific than that uh first of all we have
to have adequate preparation for a
summit conference this means at the
secretary of state level and at the
ambassadorial level by adequate
preparation i mean that at that level we
must prepare an agenda an agenda agreed
upon with the approval of the heads of
state involved now this agenda should
delineate those issues on which there is
a possibility of some agreement or
negotiation i don't believe we should go
to a summit conference unless we have
such an agenda unless we have some
reasonable insur assurance from mr
khrushchev that he intends seriously to
negotiate on those points now this may
seem like a rigid inflexible position
but let's look at the other side of the
coin if we build up the hopes of the
world by having a summit conference that
is not adequately prepared and then if
mr khrushchev finds some excuse for
breaking it up as he did this one
because he isn't going to get his way
we'd set back the cause of peace we do not
help it we can in other words negotiate
many of these items of difference
between us without going to the summit i
think we have to make a greater effort
than we have been making at the
secretary of state level at the
ambassadorial level to work out the
differences that we have and so as far
as the summit conference is concerned it
should only be entered in upon it
should only be agreed upon if the
negotiations have reached the point that
we have some reasonable assurance that
something is going to come out of it
other than some phony spirit a spirit of
geneva or camp david or whatever it is
when i say phony spirit i mean phony not
because the spirit is not good on our
side but because the soviet union simply
doesn't intend to carry out what they
say now these are the conditions that i
can lay out i could
not be more precise than that because until
we see what mr khrushchev does and what
he says uh we cannot indicate what our
plans will be any comments senator
kennedy well i think the president of
the united states last winter indicated
that before he'd go to the summit in may
certainly he did last fall he indicated that
there should be some agenda that there
should be some prior agreement he hoped
that there would be an agreement in part
in disarmament he also expressed the
hope that there should be some
understanding of the general situation
in berlin the soviet union refused to
agree to that and we went to the summit
and it was disastrous i believe we
should not go to the summit until there
is some reason to believe that a meeting
of minds can be obtained on either
berlin outer space or general
disarmament including nuclear testing in
addition i believe the next president in
january and february should go to work
in building the strength of the united
states the soviet union does understand
strength we arm to parley winston
churchill said 10 years ago if we are
strong particularly as we face a crisis
over berlin which we may in the spring
or in the winter it's important that we
maintain our determination here that we
indicate that we're building our
strength that we are determined to
protect our position that we're determined
to protect our commitment and then i
believe we should indicate our desire to
live at peace with the world
but until we're strong here until we're
moving here i believe a summit could not
be successful i hope that before we do
meet there will be preliminary agreements on
those four questions or at least two of
them or even one of them which would
warrant such a meeting i think if we had
stuck by that position last winter it
would have been a better position in may
we have time for only one or two more
questions before the closing statements
now walter cronkite's question for
senator kennedy senator the charge has
been made frequently that the united
states for many years has been on the
defensive around the world that our
policy has been a one of reaction to the
soviet union rather than positive action
on our own what areas do you see where
the united states might take the
offensive in a challenge to communism
over the next four to eight years one of
the areas and of course the most
vulnerable area is i have felt has
been eastern europe i've been critical
of the administration's failure to
suggest policies which would make it
possible for us to establish for example
closer relations with poland
particularly after the 55 56 period and
the hungarian revolution we indicated at
that time that we were not going to
intervene militarily but there was a
period there when poland demonstrated a
national independence and even the
polish government moved some differn di
distance away from the soviet union i
suggested that we amend our legislation
so that we could enjoy closer economic
ties we received the support first of the
administration and then not and we were
defeated by one vote in the senate we
passed the bill in the senate this year
but it didn't pass the house i would say
eastern europe is the area of
vulnerability of the uh s of the soviet union
secondly the relations between russia
and china they are now engaged in a
debate over whether war is the means of
communizing the world or whether they
should use subversion infiltration
economic struggles and all the rest no
one can say what that course of action
will be but i think the next president
of the united states should watch it
carefully if those two powers should
split it could have great effects
throughout the entire world thirdly i
believe that india represents a great
area for affirmative action by the free
india started from about the same place that
china did chinese communists have been
moving ahead the last 10 years india
under a free society has been making
some progress but if india does not
succeed with her 450 million people
if she can't make freedom work then people
around the world are going to determine
particularly in the underdeveloped world
that the only way that they can develop
their resources is through the communist
system fourth let me say that in africa
asia latin america eastern europe the
great force on our side is the desire of
people to be free this has expressed
itself in the revolts in eastern europe
it's expressed itself in the desire of
the people of africa to be independent
of western europe they want to be free
and my judgment is that they don't want
to give their freedom up to become
communist they want to stay free
independent perhaps of us but certainly
independent of the communists and i
believe if we identify ourselves with
that force if we identify ourselves with
it as lincoln as wilson did as franklin
roosevelt did if we become known as the
friend of freedom sustaining freedom
helping freedom helping these people in
the fight against poverty and ignorance
and disease helping them build their
lives i believe in latin america africa asia
eventually in the eastern europe and the
middle east
certainly in western europe we can
strengthen freedom we can make it move
we can put the communists on the
defensive your comment mr vice president first
with regard to poland when i talked to
mr gomulka the present leader of poland
for six hours in warsaw last year i
learned something about their problems
and particularly his right under the
soviet gun with soviet troops there he
is in a very difficult position in
taking anything independent a position
which would be independent of the soviet
union and yet let's just see what we've
done for poland a half a billion dollars
worth of aid has gone to poland
primarily economic primarily to go to
the people of poland this should
continue and it can be stepped up to
give them hope and to keep alive the
hope for freedom that i can testify they
have so deeply within them in addition we can
have more exchange with poland or with
any other of the iron curtain countries
which show some desire to take a
different path than the path that has
been taken by the ones that are complete
satellites of the soviet union now as
far as the balance of the world is
concerned i of course don't have as much
time as senator kennedy had i would just like
to s add with one point if we are going to
have the initiative in the world we must
remember that the people of africa and
asia and latin america don't want to be
pawns simply in a struggle between two
great powers the soviet union and the
united states we have to let them know
that we want to help them not because
we're simply trying to save our own skins
not because we're simply trying to fight
communism but because we care for them because we
stand for freedom because if there were
no communism in the world we would still
fight poverty and misery and disease and
tyranny if we can get that across to the
people of these countries in this decade
of the 60s the struggle for freedom will
be won john chancellor's question for vice
president nixon sir i'd like to ask you
an another question about quemoy and
matsu both you and senator kennedy say
you agree with the president on this
subject and with our treaty obligations
but the subject remains in the campaign
as an issue now is sir is this because
each of you feels obliged to respond to
the other when he talks about quemoy and
matsu and if that's true do you think an
end should be called to this discussion
or will it stay with us as a campaign
issue i would say that the issue will
stay with us as a campaign issue just as
long as senator kennedy persists in
what i think is a fundamental error he
says he supports the president's
position he says that he voted for the
resolution well just let me point this
out he voted for the resolution in 1955
which gave the president the power to
use the forces of the united states to
defend formosa and the offshore islands
but he also voted then for an amendment
which was lost fortunately an amendment
which would have drawn a line and left
out those islands and denied the right
to the president to defend those islands
if he thought that it was an attack on
formosa he repeated that error in 1959
in a speech that he made he repeated it
again in a television debate that we had
now my point is this senator kennedy has
got to be consistent here either he's
for the president and he's against the
position that those who opposed the
president in 55 and 59 and the senator's
position itself stated the other day in
our debate either he is for the
president and against that position or
we simply have a disagreement here that
must continue to be debated now if the
senator in his answer to this question
will say i now will depart or retract my
previous views i think i was wrong in
1955 i think i was wrong in 1959
and i think i was wrong in our
television debate to say that we should
draw a line leaving out quemoy and matsu
draw a line in effect abandoning these
islands to the communists then this will
be right out of the campaign because
there will be no issue between us i
support the president's position
i have always opposed drawing a line i
have opposed drawing a line because i
know that the moment you draw a line
that is an encouragement for the
communists to attack to step up their
blackmail and to force you into the war
that none of us want and so i would hope
that senator kennedy in his answer today
would clear it up it isn't enough for
him to say i support the president's
position that i voted for the resolution
of course he voted for the resolution it
was virtually unanimous but the point is
what about his error in voting for the
amendment which was not adopted
and then persisting in it in 59
persisting in it into the debate it's
very simple for him to clear it up he
can say now that he no longer believes
that a line should be drawn leaving
these islands out of the perimeter of
defense if he says that this issue will
not be discussed in the campaign
senator kennedy your comment
well mr nixon to go back to 1955 the
resolution commits the president in the
united states which i supported to
defend uh formosa the pescadores and if
it was his military judgment these
islands then the president sent a mission
composed of admiral radford and mr
robertson to persuade chiang kai-shek in
the spring of 55 to withdraw from the
two islands because they were exposed
the president was unsuccessful chiang
kai-shek would not withdraw i refer
to the fact that in 1958 as a member of
the senate foreign relations committee
i'm very familiar with the position that
the united states took in negotiating
with the chinese communists on these two
islands general twining in january 59
described the position of the united
states the position of the united states
has been that this buildup in the words
of the president has been foolish mr
herter has said these islands are
indefensible chiang kai-shek will not
withdraw because he will not withdraw
because he's committed to these islands
because we've been unable to persuade
him to withdraw we are in a very
difficult position and therefore the
president's judgment has been
that we should defend the islands if in his
military judgment and the judgment of
the commander in the field the attack on
these islands should be part of an
overall attack on formosa i support
that in view of the difficulties we've
had with the islands and due to the
difficulties and disputes we've had
with chiang kai-shek that's the only
position we can take that's not the
position you took however the first
position you took when this matter first
came up was that we should draw the line
and commit ourselves as a matter of
principle to defend these islands not as
part of the defense of formosa and the
pescadores you showed no recognition of
the administration program to try to
persuade chiang kai-shek for the last
five years to withdraw from the islands and
i challenge you tonight to deny that the
administration has sent at least several
missions to persuade chiang kai-shek to
withdraw from these islands under the agreed
and that is the testimony of uh general twining and the
assistant secretary of state in
58 under the agreed rules
gentlemen we've exhausted the time for
questions each candidate will now have
four minutes and 30 seconds for his
closing statement senator kennedy will
make the first closing statement i uh said
that i've served this country for 14
years i served it uh in the war i'm devoted
to it if i lose this election i will
continue in the senate to try to build a
stronger country but i run because i
believe this year the united states has
a great opportunity to make a move
forward to make a determination here at
home and around the world that it's
going to reestablish itself as a
vigorous society my judgment is that the
republican party has stood still here in
the united states and it's also stood
still around the world uh we're using about
50 percent of our steel capacity today
we had a recession in 58
we had a recession in 54 we're not
moving ahead in education the way we
should we didn't make a judgment in 57
and 56 and 55 and 54 that outer space
would be important if we stand still
here if we appoint people to
ambassadorships and positions in washington who
have a status quo outlook who don't
recognize that this is a revolutionary
time then the united states does not
maintain its influence and if we fail
the cause of freedom fails i believe it
incumbent upon the next president of the
united states to get this country moving
again to get our economy moving ahead to set
before the american people its goals
its unfinished business and then
throughout the world appoint the best
people we can get ambassadors who can speak the
language not merely people who made a
political contribution but who can speak
the language bring students here let
them see what kind of a country we have
mr nixon said that we should not regard
them as pawns in the cold war we should
identify ourselves with them if that were
true why didn't we identify ourselves
with the people of africa why didn't we
bring students over here why did we
suddenly offer congo 300 students last
june when they had the tremendous revolt
that was more than we had offered to all
of africa the year before from the
federal government i believe that this
party republican party has stood still
really for 25 years its leadership has
it opposed all of the programs of
president roosevelt and others the
minimum wage and for housing and economic
growth and development of our natural
resources the tennessee valley and all
the rest and i believe that if we can
get a party which believes in movement
which believes in going ahead then we
can reestablish our position in the
world strong defense strong in economic
growth justice for our people
co guarantee of constitutional rights so
that people will believe that we
practice what we preach and then around
the world particularly to try to
reestablish the atmosphere which existed
in latin america at the time of franklin
roosevelt he was a good neighbor in
latin america because he was a good
neighbor in the united states because
they saw us as a society that was
compassionate that cared about people that
was moving this country ahead
i believe it my responsibility as the
leader of the democratic party in 1960
to try to warn the american people that
in this crucial time we can no longer
afford to stand still we can no longer
afford to be second best
i want people all over the world to look
to the united states again to feel that
we're on the move
to feel that our high noon is in the
future i want mr khrushchev to know
that a new generation of americans who
fought in europe and italy in the
pacific for freedom in world war ii
have now taken over in the united states
and that they're going to put this
country back to work again i don't
believe that there is anything this
country cannot do i don't believe
there's any burden or any responsibility
that any american would not assume to
protect his country protect our security
to advance the cause of freedom and i
believe it incumbent upon us now to do
that franklin roosevelt said in 1936
that that generation of
americans had a rendezvous with destiny i
believe in 1960 and 61 and two and three
we have a rendezvous with destiny and i
believe it incumbent upon us to be the
defenders of the united states and the
defenders of freedom and to do that we
must give this country leadership and we
must get america moving again
now vice president nixon your closing
statement senator kennedy has said
tonight again what he has said several
times in the course of this these debates and
in the campaign that america is standing
still america is not standing still it
has not been standing still and let's
set the record straight right now by
looking at the record as al smith used
to say he talks about housing we built
more houses in the last seven years than
in any administration and 30 percent
more than in the previous administration
we talk about schools three times as
many classrooms built in the past
administration in eisenhower that under
the truman administration let's talk
about civil rights more progress in the
past eight years than in the whole 80
years before he talks about the progress
in the field of slum clearance and the
like we find four times as many projects
undertaken and completed in this
administration than in the previous one
anybody that says america has been
standing still for the last seven and a
half years hasn't been traveling in
america he's been in some other country
let's get that straight right away now
the second point we have to understand
is this however america has not been
standing still but america cannot stand
pat we can't stand pat for the reason
that we're in a race as i've indicated
we can't stand pat because it is
essential with the conflict that we have
around the world that we not just hold
our own that we not keep just freedom
for ourselves it is essential that we
extend freedom extend it to all the
world and this means more than what
we've been doing it means keeping
america even stronger militarily than
she is it means seeing that our economy
moves forward even faster than it has it
means making more progress in civil
rights than we have so that we can be a
splendid example for all the world to
see of democracy in action
at its best now looking at the other
parts of the world south america talking
about our record and the previous one we
had a good neighbor policy yes it
sounded fine
but let's look at it there were 11
dictators when we came into power in
1953 in latin america there are only three
left let's look at africa 20 new
countries in africa during the course of
this administration not one of them
selected a communist government all of
them voted for freedom a free type of
government does this show that communism
has the bigger pull or freedom has the
bigger pull am i trying to indicate that
we have no problems in africa or latin
america or asia of course not
what i am trying to indicate is that the
tide of history's on our side and that
we can keep it on our side because we're
on the right side we're on the side of
freedom we're on the side of justice
against the forces of slavery against
the forces of injustice but we aren't
going to move america forward and we
aren't going to be able to lead the
world to win this struggle for freedom
if we have a permanent inferiority
complex about american achievements
because we are first in the world in
space as i've indicated we are first in
science we are first in education and
we're going to move even further ahead
with the kind of leadership that we can
provide in these years ahead one other
point i would make what could you do
senator kennedy and i are candidates for
the presidency of the united states and
in the years to come it will be written
that one or the other of us was elected
and that he was or was not a great
president what will determine whether
senator kennedy or i if i am elected was
a great president it will not be our
ambition that will determine it because
greatness is not something that is
written on a campaign poster it will be
determined to the extent that we
represent the deepest ideals
the highest feelings and faith of the
american people in other words the next
president as he leads america and the
free world can be only as great as the
american people are great and so i say
in conclusion keep america's faith
strong see that the young people of
america particularly have faith in the
ideals of freedom and faith in god which
distinguishes us from the atheistic
materialists who oppose us thank you
gentlemen both candidates have asked me
to express their thanks to the networks
for this opportunity to appear on this
discussion may i repeat that all those
concerned in tonight's discussion have
sometimes reluctantly followed the rules
and conditions read at the outset and
agreed to in advance by the candidates
and the networks the opening statements
ran eight minutes each the closing
statements ran four minutes 30
seconds the order of speaking was
reversed from their first joint
appearance when they followed the same
procedure a panel of newsmen questioned
each candidate alternately each had two
and a half minutes to reply the other
had a minute and a half to comment but
the first discussion dealt only with
domestic policy this one dealt only with
foreign policy one last word as members
of a new political generation vice
president nixon and senator kennedy have
used new means of communication to
pioneer a new type of political debate
the character and courage with which
these two men have spoken sets a high
standard for generations to come
surely they have set a new precedent
perhaps they have established a new
tradition this is quincy howe good night
from new york